\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename meltplugin.info
@c don't need @include gcc-common.texi

@c Common macros to support generating man pages copied from gcc-common.texi:

@macro gcctabopt{body}
@code{\body\}
@end macro
@macro gccoptlist{body}
@smallexample
\body\
@end smallexample
@end macro

@iftex
@alias gol = *
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro gol
@end macro
@end ifnottex
@c Macro to generate a "For the N.N.N version" subtitle on the title
@c page of TeX documentation.  This macro should be used in the
@c titlepage environment after the title and any other subtitles have
@c been placed, and before any authors are placed.
@macro versionsubtitle
@subtitle For @sc{MELT} plugin of @sc{gcc}
@c Even if there are no authors, the second titlepage line should be
@c forced to the bottom of the page.
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@end macro

@settitle MELT plugin documentation

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@paragraphindent 1
@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Free Software Foundation, Inc.


Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``Funding Free Software'', the Front-Cover
Texts being (a) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being (b)
(see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end copying
@ifnottex
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* MELT plugin: (meltplugin).            MELT plugin for GCC.
@end direntry
This file documents the MELT plugin for GCC.
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@sp 1
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title the MELT plugin for GCC
@versionsubtitle
@author Basile Starynkevitch
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top
@top Introduction
@cindex introduction

This manual documents briefly how to use the MELT plugin for GCC.  The
 use of the GNU compilers is documented in a separate manual.
 @xref{Top,, Introduction, gcc, Using the GNU Compiler Collection
 (GCC)}. The MELT plugin for GCC permits you to develop your specific
 extensions of GCC in a powerful, lispy, domain specific language
 (also called MELT).

This manual is mainly a reference manual rather than a tutorial. It
discusses how to use the MELT plugin for GCC.
Additional tutorial information for GCC is linked to from
@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/readings.html} and for MELT is linked to from 
@uref{http://gcc-melt.org/}. 

MELT documentation is made of a human written docuemtation (this
document) and of a machine generated documentation. The machine
generated documentation explains the MELT definitions (of functions,
classes, selectors, primitives, etc...). Since it is generated from a
GPLv3 source code, that generated documentation is released separately
under a GPLv3 license. (the main author of this document, Basile
Starynkevitch, understands that GPL and GFDL licenses are
incompatible, so merging these two documentations is inappropriate.).

@menu
* MELT::            the Middle End Lisp Translator.
* Funding::         How to help assure funding for free software.
* GNU Project::     The GNU Project and GNU/Linux.

* Copying::         GNU General Public License says
                    how you can copy and share GCC.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: How you can copy and share this manual.
* MELT Option Index::    Index to MELT plugin command line options.
* MELT Concept Index::   Index of MELT concepts and symbol names.
@end menu

@include melt.texi

@include funding.texi
@include gnu.texi
@include gpl_v3.texi
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFDL
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node MELT Option Index
@unnumbered MELT Option Index

MELT plugin's command line options are indexed here without any
initial @samp{-} or @samp{--}.  Where an option has both positive and
negative forms (such as @option{-f@var{option}} and
@option{-fno-@var{option}}), relevant entries in the manual are
indexed under the most appropriate form; it may sometimes be useful to
look up both forms. Each option has a plugin form
@option{-fplugin-melt-arg-@var{option}} and a MELT branch form
@option{-fmelt-@var{option}} which is used in the GCC experimental
MELT branch.

@printindex op

@node MELT Concept Index
@unnumbered MELT Concept Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
