\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename meltpluginapi.info
@c don't need @include gcc-common.texi
@c Macro to generate a "For the N.N.N version" subtitle on the title
@c page of TeX documentation.  This macro should be used in the
@c titlepage environment after the title and any other subtitles have
@c been placed, and before any authors are placed.
@macro versionsubtitle
@subtitle For @sc{MELT} plugin of @sc{gcc}
@c Even if there are no authors, the second titlepage line should be
@c forced to the bottom of the page.
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@end macro

@settitle MELT plugin API (generated documentation)

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp


@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This document is generated from MELT source code (which is GPLv3+ licensed)
so is under GPLv3+

    This file is part of the MELT plugin for GCC (GCC MELT)

    GCC MELT is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
    any later version.

    GCC MELT is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    along with GCC MELT; see the file COPYING3.  If not see
    <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

@end copying

@ifnottex
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* MELT plugin API: (meltpluginapi).            MELT plugin API.
@end direntry

This file documents the MELT plugin API. MELT is a plugin for
GCC. This document is mostly generated from MELT source code (GPLv3+)
so is under the same GPLv3+ license as the source code from which (and
with which) it has been generated. This document was mostly generated
by the MELT plugin (run in a specific @code{makedoc} mode) from its
source code.

@sp 1
@insertcopying
@sp 1
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title the MELT plugin for GCC
@versionsubtitle
@author Basile Starynkevitch
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top
@top Introduction
@cindex introduction

This document (mostly generated from MELT source code) documents the
MELT application programming interface. It is a reference manual
generated from (GPLv3+ licensed) MELT source code, so is itself GPLv3+
licensed.

Additional tutorial information for GCC is linked to from
@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/readings.html} and for MELT is linked to from 
@uref{http://gcc-melt.org/}. 

@menu
* MELT Programming Reference::            the MELT API.
* GNU Project::
* Copying::                               the GPLv3 license.
* MELT API Index::
@end menu

@c the meltgendoc.texi is generated from various *.melt source files
@c under GPLv3+ so is under GPLv3+
@include meltgendoc.texi

@include gnu.texi
@include gpl_v3.texi

@node MELT API Index
@unnumbered MELT API Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
