@c Copyright (c) 2008,2009 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GCC manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gcc.texi.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c  MELT
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node MELT
@chapter MELT: Middle End Lisp Translator
@cindex MELT
@cindex Middle End Lisp Translator


The MELT branch introduces a Lisp dialect to express middle-end analysers. 
This chapter describes the dialect and how to use it.
A working knowledge of Scheme or Lisp is presupposed.


See the @uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/MiddleEndLispTranslator,,MELT wiki page}

@menu
* MELT Prerequisites and Deficiencies::       Prerequisites and topics not yet covered in this MELT chapter.
* MELT overview::                             An overview of MELT.
* Building the MELT branch::                  Configuration and building requirements and instructions for MELT.
* MELT as a plugin::                          Building and using MELT as a plugin.
* Invoking MELT::                             Invoking MELT.
* Tutorial about MELT::                       Tutorial describing MELT.
* Reference on MELT::                         MELT language reference.
* Writing C code for MELT::                   
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@c MELT Prerequisites and Deficiencies
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------

@node MELT Prerequisites and Deficiencies
@section MELT Prerequisites and Deficiencies

A working knowledge of Scheme or Lisp is presupposed.

This chapter is incomplete.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@c MELT Overview
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------

@node MELT overview
@section MELT overview
@cindex MELT overview

Any MELT enabling compilation is really a long lasting compilation. It
is supposed that you use a powerful workstation (or laptop) with
enough memory (at least 4Gigabytes of RAM is receommended on a 64 bits
machine like x86-64), and that the MELT-enabled compilation will run a
lot slower than a simple @code{gcc -O1} compilation (hopefully doing
some useful stuff). Notice that a MELT compilation actually generates
C code, compile it (using another GCC compilation process) to a
dynamically loadable library, and load its into the MELT compilation
process.

@c some sentences copied from the Wiki page. I (Basile) wrote all of them.

The MELT branch contains several (related) stuff. Everything can be
enabled or disabled at GCC configure time or at GCC run time:

@enumerate


@item a Lisp dialect compiled into C code, with which one can code
sophisticated or prototypical middle end passes.

@item a runtime which extends the GCC infrastructure to support the
previous items, in particular a generational copying garbage
collector well suited for the lisp dialect above, which is build
above the existing GGC (which deals with old values).

@end enumerate

MELT is bootstrapped, in the sense that the translation from the MELT
dialect to C is coded in MELT (hence the MELT generated C code is
available from the source code).

The generated C code is including only one file @code{run-melt.h}
which includes many GCC include files internal to the compiler. It is
compiled into a dynamic library by a shell script
@code{*melt-cc-script*} which invokes the host GCC with appropriate
flags.

MELT obviously need that the binary (dynamic libraries @code{warm*.so})
for the MELT translator are already available. More generally, it uses
several kind of files:

@enumerate

@item the script used to compile generated C files info dynamically loadable stuff.
This script may be invoked by MELT GCC. In common cases, the first
argument to the script is the MELT generated input @code{*.c} file and
the second argument is the MELT loaded output @code{*.so} dynamic
library.

@item an include directory (passed by @code{-I} to the compiler) 
containing all the useful GCC headers. This directory is only written by
the installation procedure.

@item a permanent generated C code directory which contains some essential files, in particular the C form of the MELT translated.
 
@end enumerate

MELT can also be used as a plugin for GCC. It uses some of the plugin
machinery, even inside the MELT branch.

@c =======================================================================
@node Building the MELT branch
@section Building the MELT branch
@cindex Building the MELT branch



To compile the MELT branch, you need the Parma Polyhedra Library. The
Parma Polyhedra Library (PPL) is a free library available
@uref{http://www.cs.unipr.it/ppl/,,here}, it is a C++ library (GPLv3
licensed) handling lattices like intervals etc. Also, the host
compiler (the compiler which compiles the source code of GCC), also
used to compile MELT generated C code during MELT enabled @code{gcc}
execution, should be some version of @code{gcc} (preferably a 4.x
version at least).

Note that currently MELT is only compiled on Linux machines.

MELT can also be used as a plugin to GCC (trunk, i.e. future gcc-4.5).

@c =======================================================================
@node MELT as a plugin
@section MELT as a plugin
@cindex MELT as a plugin

MELT can be used as a plugin to a GCC trunk binary (i.e. future gcc
4.5) build with plugin enabled.  You'll need both the source and build
trees of your GCC to build MELT. 

Detailed instructions about building and using MELT as a plugin are
available at @uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/MELT%20tutorial,,MELT wiki
tutorial page}.

@c =======================================================================
@node Invoking MELT
@section Invoking MELT
@cindex Invoking MELT

Without any MELT specific program flags, the MELT variant of gcc
behave as the trunk. So to get or use MELT features, you need to pass
some special flags. Most of these flags are starting with
@code{-fmelt}. They for the middle-end of GCC so are common for
every source language (ie @code{gcc}, @code{g++} @dots{} commands) and
target.

MELT is usually invoked while compiling a (C, C++, @dots{}) source
file but may occasionnally be invoked without compiling any source
input to perform tasks which are not related to a particular GCC input
source file. In practice, you should pass an empty C file to
@code{gcc} for that purpose. In particular, the translation of a MELT
file @code{foo.melt} into C code @code{foo.c} is done with a special
invocation like @code{gcc -fmelt=translatefile -fmelt-arg=foo.melt
-fmelt-secondarg=foo.c} (possibly with other options like some
appropriate @code{-fmelt-init=}). It is possible but deprecated to
invoke with @code{-fmelt=compilefile} instead of
@code{-fmelt=translatefile}. In other words, the MELT translator to C
@emph{is not} a GCC front-end, like e.g. @code{g++} is a C++ front-end
of GCC.

The table below lists all MELT specific options, in alphabetical order.

@table @gcctabopt
@item -fmelt=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt=}
@opindex fmelt
This flag (called the MELT mode flag) is required for every MELT
enabled compilation. If it is not given, no MELT specific processing
is done.  If given, this gives the command to be executed before any
MELT passes. It uses the @code{:sysdata_cmd_fundict} field of
@code{INITIAL_SYSTEM_DATA} internal object of MELT to determine the
MELT function applied to execute the command. If this application
returns nil, no GCC compilation occur (i.e. no @code{*.c} or
@code{*.cc} etc@dots{} source file is read). Hence, some commands may
be used for their side-effects. In particular, the compilation of MELT
lisp source file @code{*.melt} into C code @code{*.c} is done this
way.

@item -fmelt-arg=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-arg=}
@opindex fmelt-arg=
This gives the first argument string to MELT. It is incompatible with
the @code{-fmelt-arglist=} option.

@item -fmelt-arglist=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-arglist=}
@opindex fmelt-arglist=
This gives the first argument list of strings to MELT. It is
incompatible with the @code{-fmelt-arg=} option. The string program
argument is split into a list of strings using the comma
separator. For example, @code{-fmelt-arglist=1,BB,3} makes a
three-element list argument with first string @code{1}, second string
@code{BB} and third string @code{3}. There is no way to give a
string subargument containing a comma.


@item -fmelt-compile-script=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-compile-script=}
@opindex fmelt-compile-script=
This sets the compile script (default is @code{melt-compile-script}
somewhere inside GCC files) used to compile MELT generated C code into
dynamically loaded stuff. The script is usually invoked by GCC with
two arguments: the C file generated by MELT and the dynamic library
(e.g. a @code{*.so} or @code{*.la}) to be generated by the
script. Notice that MELT generates huge C files (containing, in
addition of a routine for each MELT function, a very big
initialization routine), so it is recommended to avoid compiling these
generated files with @code{-O3}.

@item -fmelt-debug
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-debug}
@opindex fmelt-debug
This flag has no argument and asks for lot of debugging output. It is
only useful to debug MELT and is unrelated to the @code{-g} flag
asking GCC to output debug information.

@item -fmelt-debugskip=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-debugskip=}
@opindex fmelt-debugskip=
This flag (only useful with @code{-fmelt-debug}) has an integer
argument. When @code{-fmelt-debug} is given with
@code{-fmelt-debugskip=1000} the first thousand debug messages are
skipped, so are not printed.

@item -fmelt-source-path=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-source-path=}
@opindex fmelt-source-path=
This flag sets the path (colon separated list of directories) for
sources (i.e. @file{*.melt} and @file{*.c}). Otherwise use the
@code{GCCMELT_SOURCE_PATH} environment variable.

@item -fmelt-module-path=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-module-path=}
@opindex fmelt-module-path=
This flag sets the path (colon separated list of directories) for
MELT binary modules (i.e. @file{*.so}). Otherwise use the
@code{GCCMELT_MODULE_PATH} environment variable.

@item -fmelt-gdbmstate=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-gdbmstate=}
@opindex fmelt-gdbmstate=
This flag sets the GDBM indexed file containing global state. It
should always be specified when needed, because there is no default.

@item -fmelt-init=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-init=}
@opindex fmelt-init=
This flag sets the initial MELT modules. They are separated by
semi-colons or (on Unix only) colons. So @code{-fmelt-init=foo:bar}
or @code{'-fmelt-init=foo;bar'} (quotes are useful for the shell
running GCC) load first the @code{foo} module and then the @code{bar}
module. A module starting with an at sign @code{@@} is handled as a
module list file. The @code{.modlis} extension is added, and then a
file is seeked by that name. This file is read line by line (with
empty or blank lines skipped, and comment lines starting with an hash
@code{#} skipped). Each line is the name of a module do be load in
sequence. For example, @code{-fmelt-init=@@mylist:bar} with a file
@file{mylist.modlis} containing
@example
# file mylist.modlis ; just a comment
alpha
beta
@end example
would have the same effect as @code{-fmelt-init=alpha:beta:bar}.
Notice that modules are seeked in several directories.  There is a
default module list called @file{melt-default-modules.modlis} so the
default value of this flag is
@code{-fmelt-init=@@melt-default-modules}.

@item -fmelt-tempdir=
@gccoptlist{-fmelt-tempdir=}
@opindex fmelt-tempdir=
@end table
This flags sets the temporary MELT directory. If specified it is not
cleaned. If it does not exist, it is mkdir-ed and cleaned. Avoid
setting it to a non-empty directory which may contain files named like
MELT modules.




@c =======================================================================
@node Tutorial about MELT
@section Tutorial about MELT
@cindex Tutorial about MELT


As in all Lisps, parenthesis are important, so @code{a} and @code{(a)}
do not mean the same thing. The first stuff after an opening
parenthesis has usually an operator or syntactic keyword role.

@cindex @code{upgrade-warmelt} make target for MELT
MELT is a Lisp dialect translated into (unreadable, or at least
unfriendly) C code. Some MELT constructs, and some MELT limitations
(e.g. lack of tail-recursion) are related to this C
translatability. The MELT translator is itself written in MELT (files
@file{gcc/melt/warmelt-*.melt}) and is bootstrapped; the translated C
files are in @file{gcc/warmelt-*-0.c}; they are quite big and are
distributed with the GCC source code; use the @code{upgrade-warmelt}
target of @file{gcc/Makefile.in} to regenerate these C translations.

MELT is closely related to GCC internal passes and internal middle-end
representations and runtime. Hence (in contrast to other LISP
dialects) @emph{MELT is dealing with both boxed values and unboxed
stuff} (e.g. plain @code{long} integers as in C, but also @code{tree}s
and @code{gimple}s, etc@dots{}, as inside GCC, separating them using their
@emph{ctype}). Keep always in mind the boxed versus unboxed
distinction. Because of that, and because of GCC runtime (in
particular the GGC garbage collector), MELT is neither polymorphic
(you cannot deal with unboxed stuff like with boxed values) nor
polytopic (no variable arguments facility).

Some familiarity with other Lisp dialects and with GCC internals is
required to code in MELT.

The MELT runtime contains a copying generational garbage collector
-GC- implemented in @file{gcc/melt-runtime.c}, backed up by the previously
existing GCC ordinary (precise, marking) garbage collector GGC. The
MELT-specific copying GC is designed for efficiency (but requires a
very specific C coding style, easy to achieve in generated C code, but
uncumfortable for human C developers), and handles well quick
allocation of many short-lived objects [which is not a goald of
GGC]. Therefore, @emph{don't be afraid of allocating a lot of values}
inside MELT code.

@menu
* Reserved MELT syntax and symbols::
* Primitives in MELT::
* Citerators in MELT::
* Functions in MELT::
@end menu

This section has to be completed.

@node Reserved MELT syntax and symbols
@subsection Reserved MELT syntax and symbols

The following symbols have specific MELT meaning. Use them only as
described here and avoid redefining them.  @code{and assert_msg
comment compile_warning cond cppif
current_module_environment_container debug_msg defciterator defclass
definstance defprimitive defselector defun exit export_class
export_macro export_values fetch_predefined forever get_field if instance lambda
let make_instance match multicall or parent_module_environment progn
put_fields quote return setq store_predefined
unsafe_get_field unsafe_put_fields
update_current_module_environment_container}

Also avoid symbols starting with @code{def}

@node Primitives in MELT
@subsection Primitives in MELT

@cindex Primitive in MELT
A MELT primitive defines an operator by specifying how to translate
into C each of its invocation. As a simple example, the less-than
integer operator @code{<i} is defined as
@lisp
(defprimitive <i                @r{; define the primitive }
  (:long                        @r{; next formal arguments are longs}
   a b)                         @r{; the two formal arguments}
  :long                         @r{; the type of the result (also long)}
  "((" a ") < (" b "))")        @r{; how to expand into C code}
@end lisp

Later on, a MELT expression like @code{(<i @var{a} @var{b})} gets
translated into C code similar to @code{((curfnum[3]) < (curfnum[7]))}
where @code{curfun[3]}@footnote{@code{curfnum} is a C macro expanding
to @code{curframe__.varnum}} is the translation of the normalized
form@footnote{The C code for the normalization of @var{a} which
assigns @code{curfnum[3]} occurs before, so translating MELT to C is
not a simple rewriting algorithm..} of @var{a}, etc.

@cindex unboxed MELT stuff
@cindex ctype in MELT
Note that the above primitive accepts raw long integers (exactly the C
@code{long} type) and returns such a long integer [0 if
@code{((a)<(b))} was false in the C sense, and non-zero, perhaps -1,
if it was true]. We say that such integers are @emph{unboxed} stuff
(we don't speak of values in that case). The symbol @code{:long}
represents the C type @code{long} and we call it a @emph{ctype}.

@node Citerators in MELT
@subsection Citerators in MELT

@cindex Citerator in MELT

A MELT c-iterator or @emph{citerator} is a construct which generalize
iterative loops (like the @code{for} in C). As a trivial example, to
iterate on positive integers till a limit, define

@lisp
(defciterator each-posint-till     @r{; define each-posint-till citerator}
 (:long lim)                      @r{; start formal argument is lim}
 eachposint                       @r{; state symbol - uniquely substituted}
 (:long cur)                      @r{; local formals}
 (                                @r{; start of before expansion}
 "long " eachposint ";"
 " for (" eachposint"=0; " 
        eachposint "<" lim ";"
        eachposint "++) @{"
   cur " = " eachposint;
 )
 (                                @r{; start of after expansion}
 "@}" 
 )
) 
@end lisp

When used in a MELT expression like @code{(each-posint-till (5) (:long
v) (print-long v))} -which has @code{:void} ctype because citerators
are only useful for their side-effects- the C translation is vaguely
similar (assuming @code{print-long} is a primitive expanding to
@code{printf(``%d\n'',@var{@dots{}})} to something looking like
@example
curfnum[11] /*LIM*/ = 5;
@{long eachposint_24;
 for (eachposint_24=0; eachposint_24<curfnum[11]; eachposint_24++) @{
   curfnum[3] /*V*/ = eachposint_24;
   printf("%d\n", curfnum[3] /*V*/);
 @}
@}
@end example

So the start formals is translated as some local variable in the MELT
frame, the state symbol @code{eachposint} is only used to generate a C
identifier (unique to each occurrence of the citerator) and the local
formals are translated to local variables bound inside the iterators
body.

In practice, citerators are very useful for interfacing to the various
iterating idioms in GCC. A more realistic example is
@lisp
@r{;;;; iterate on a gimpleseq}
(defciterator each_in_gimpleseq
  (:gimpleseq gseq)			@r{;start formals}
  eachgimplseq
  (:gimple g)				@r{;local formals}
  ( @r{;;; before expansion}
   "gimple_stmt_iterator gsi_" eachgimplseq ";\n"
   @r{;; test that @t{gseq} is not null to be safe}
   "if (" gseq ") for (gsi_" eachgimplseq " = gsi_start (" gseq
        "); !gsi_end_p (gsi_" eachgimplseq ");"
   " gsi_next (&gsi_" eachgimplseq ")) @{\n"
    g " = gsi_stmt (gsi_" eachgimplseq ");"
   )
  ( @r{;;; after expansion}
   "@}"
   )
)
@end lisp

@node Functions in MELT
@subsection Functions in MELT

@cindex Function in MELT

As in many lisp dialect (e.g. Common Lisp) MELT functions are defined
using the @code{defun} construct. The first argument (and the primary
result) of all MELT function should always be a value, so it is not
possible to give an unboxed @code{gimple} stuff to a function; hence
we box it (pack it into a MELT value) before passing it as an
argument.

The following define a second-order function (actually defined in
@file{ana-base.melt}) called @code{do_each_gimpleseq} which gets two
arguments, the first being itself a MELT function and the second being
an unobxed @code{gimple} stuff, and apply the first argument to boxes
packing each @code{gimple} inside the given @code{gimpleseq}.

@lisp
@r{;; apply a function to each boxed gimple in a gimple seq}
(defun do_each_gimpleseq (f :gimpleseq gseq)
  (each_in_gimpleseq 
   (gseq) (:gimple g)
   (let ( (gplval (make_gimple discr_gimple g)) )
     (f gplval)))
)
@end lisp

This function is only useful for its side effect (calling a function
for each member of a @code{gimpleseq}). It returns the nil value.

The real translation to C of the above is a quite big and messy C
function, actually:

@verbatim
static melt_ptr_t
rout_9_DO_EACH_GIMPLESEQ (meltclosure_ptr_t closp_,
			  melt_ptr_t firstargp_, const char xargdescr_[],
			  union meltparam_un *xargtab_,
			  const char xresdescr_[],
			  union meltparam_un *xrestab_)
{
#if ENABLE_CHECKING
  static long call_counter__;
  long thiscallcounter__ ATTRIBUTE_UNUSED = ++call_counter__;
#define callcount thiscallcounter__
#else
#define callcount 0L
#endif
  struct frame_rout_9_DO_EACH_GIMPLESEQ_st
  {
    unsigned nbvar;
#if ENABLE_CHECKING
    const char *flocs;
#endif
    struct meltclosure_st *clos;
    struct excepth_melt_st *exh;
    struct callframe_melt_st *prev;
#define CURFRAM_NBVARPTR 5
    void *varptr[5];
/*no varnum*/
#define CURFRAM_NBVARNUM /*none*/0
/*others*/
    gimple_seq loc_CTYPE_GIMPLESEQ__o0;
    gimple loc_CTYPE_GIMPLE__o1;
    long _spare_;
  }
  curfram__;
  memset (&curfram__, 0, sizeof (curfram__));
  curfram__.nbvar = 5;
  curfram__.clos = closp_;
  curfram__.prev = (struct callframe_melt_st *) melt_topframe;
  melt_topframe = (struct callframe_melt_st *) &curfram__;
  melt_trace_start ("DO_EACH_GIMPLESEQ", callcount);
@end verbatim

The generated C function has a strange C formal arguments list (every
applicable routine has the same signature in C. All arguments except
the first are passed in an array of union, described by a short
constant string, one character per argument, encoding its
ctype. Secondary results are handled likewise). Some code is only
enabled with @code{#if ENABLE_CHECKING} when GCC is configured for
debugging (not for release). The MELT call frame is declared
explicitly as a structure called @code{curfram__}, and is properly
initialized, and set as the @code{melt_topframe}. The
@code{melt_trace_strart MELT_LOCATION callcount} C macros are
significant only when @code{#if ENABLE_CHECKING}.

@verbatim
  /*getarg#0 */
  MELT_LOCATION ("ana-base.melt:436:/ getarg");
#ifndef MELTGCC_NOLINENUMBERING
#line 436 "ana-base.melt" /**::getarg::**/
#endif /*MELTGCC_NOLINENUMBERING */
 /*_.F__V2*/ curfptr[1] = (melt_ptr_t) firstargp_;
@end verbatim

We start to fetch the first argument into the current frame, since
@code{curfptr} is actually a C macro defined as
@code{curfram__.varptr}. The @code{MELT_LOCATION} macro call
(significant only when checking was enabled, and setting the
@code{flocs} field of the current frame in that case) and the
@code{#line} directive@footnote{The @code{#line} directive can be
disabled by compiling the generated C with
@code{-DMELTGCC_NOLINENUMBERING}.} refer to the MELT source
location. For clarity, we now skip them, but there are @emph{lots of
such positional information} in the generated C code. Note that a
single MELT source line is producing many C code lines (hence the line
numbering seen in a debugger might be slightly wrong), and that some
comments are generated (notably explaining what each @code{curfptr}
occurrence means).

@verbatim
  /*getarg#1 */
  if (xargdescr_[0] != BPAR_GIMPLESEQ)
    goto lab_endgetargs;
  curfram__.loc_CTYPE_GIMPLESEQ__o0 = xargtab_[0].bp_gimpleseq;
  goto lab_endgetargs;
lab_endgetargs:;
@end verbatim

The second argument is likewise fetched, only if the actual argument
is of @code{gimpleseq} ctype. The useless goto is optimized by any
serious C compiler (like gcc).

@verbatim
/*block*/
  {
    /*citerblock EACH_IN_GIMPLESEQ */
    {
      gimple_stmt_iterator gsi_cit1__EACHGIMPLSEQ;
      if ( /*_?*/ curfram__.loc_CTYPE_GIMPLESEQ__o0)
	for (gsi_cit1__EACHGIMPLSEQ =
	     gsi_start ( /*_?*/ curfram__.loc_CTYPE_GIMPLESEQ__o0);
	     !gsi_end_p (gsi_cit1__EACHGIMPLSEQ);
	     gsi_next (&gsi_cit1__EACHGIMPLSEQ))
	  {
/*_?*/ curfram__.loc_CTYPE_GIMPLE__o1 =
	      gsi_stmt (gsi_cit1__EACHGIMPLSEQ);
	    /*block */
	    {
   /*_.GPLVAL__V4*/ curfptr[3] =
		(meltgc_new_gimple
		 ((meltobject_ptr_t)
		  (( /*!DISCR_GIMPLE */ curfrout->tabval[0])),
		  ( /*_?*/ curfram__.loc_CTYPE_GIMPLE__o1)));;
@end verbatim

This is the beginning of a block generated by a citerator. It contains
the translation of the @code{make_gimple} primitive use as a call to
the @code{meltgc_new_gimple} C function.

@verbatim
	      /*apply */
	      {
		/*_.F__V5*/ curfptr[4] =
		  melt_apply ((meltclosure_ptr_t)
				 ( /*_.F__V2*/ curfptr[1]),
				 (melt_ptr_t) ( /*_.GPLVAL__V4*/
						  curfptr[3]), 
                                 "", (union meltparam_un *) 0, 
                                 "", (union meltparam_un *) 0);
	      };
@end verbatim

This is the translation of the application of @code{f}. Since there
only one argument and no secundary results, we pass null @code{union
meltparam_un} pointers described by empty strings to follow the
pecular conventions required by
@code{melt_apply}@footnote{@code{melt_apply} is a short inlined
function defined in @file{gcc/melt.h} which checks that the applied
value is indeed a MELT function closure and calls its routine.} and
respected by MELT generated C functions implementing MELT routines.

@verbatim
	      /*epilog */
	     /*clear *//*_.GPLVAL__V4*/ curfptr[3] = 0;
	     /*clear *//*_.F__V5*/ curfptr[4] = 0;
	    };
	  }
      /*citerepilog */
	    /*clear *//*_?*/ curfram__.loc_CTYPE_GIMPLE__o1 = 0;
	    /*clear *//*_.LET___V3*/ curfptr[2] = 0;
    }				/*endciterblock EACH_IN_GIMPLESEQ */
@end verbatim

Some MELT local variables are explicitly cleared. This helps the MELT
garbege collector. The block generated for the citerator is ended,
again by clearing some locals.

@verbatim
    /*epilog */ };
  goto labend_rout;
labend_rout:
  melt_trace_end ("DO_EACH_GIMPLESEQ", callcount);
  melt_topframe = (struct callframe_melt_st *) curfram__.prev;
  return (melt_ptr_t) ( /*noretval */ NULL);
#undef callcount
#undef CURFRAM_NBVARNUM
#undef CURFRAM_NBVARPTR
}				/*end rout_9_DO_EACH_GIMPLESEQ */
@end verbatim

This is the whole function epilog. The MELT top frame is popped, and
the previous is reinstated.

Of course, nobody wants to read or understand the generated code
above.

In practice, such second-order functions (second order because they
are functionals, consuming function arguments) are often used with
anonymous functions using the @code{lambda} construct, eg
@lisp
(do_each_gimpleseq
 (lambda (boxgimp) @r{;anonymous function with argument boxgimp}
  (let ( (:long gimp
          @r{; fetch the content of the boxed gimple value as an unboxed stuff}
          (gimple_content boxgimp)) )
  @var{@dots{}. do something with @code{gimp} stuff @dots{}.}
 ))
bgs @r{; some boxed gimple value}
)
@end lisp
@c =======================================================================

@node Reference on MELT
@section Reference on MELT
@cindex Reference on MELT

@menu
* Lexical MELT conventions::
* Main MELT syntax and features::
* MELT modules and translation::
* Writing GCC passes in MELT::
@end menu

@node Lexical MELT conventions
@subsection Lexical MELT conventions

It is recommended to edit MELT files with a Lisp-aware editor
(e.g. the GNU emacs Lisp mode).

As in Lisp dialects:

@itemize @bullet

@item parenthesis 
are essential and should be matched. It is an error to add extra right
parenthesis.

@item brackets 
are like parenthesis but should be matched (but you probably don't
want to use them). @code{[a b]} is the same as @code{(a b)} but both
@code{[a b)} and @code{(a b]} are incorrect.

@item comments 
start with a semicolon (@code{;}) to the end of the line. This is the
prefered way to put comments in MELT file.

@item block comments 
start with hash-bar (@code{#|}), may take several lines, and end with
bar-hash (@code{|#}). Don't nest block comments.

@item space 
characters are token sepators, but indentation does not matter (we
strongly recommend the MELT code to be properly indented, e.g. using
Emacs Lisp mode, for readability purposes).

@item case 
is insensitive; words, i.e. identifiers and keywords are all converted
to uppercases.

@item strings 
are denoted like in C between double quotes, with backslashes escaping
(eg double-backslash @code{\\} to represent a single backslash,
backslash doublequote @code{\"} to represent a doublequote, backslash t
@code{\t} for a tab, , and @code{\xfe} to represent the character
coded 0xfe in hex, etc. In addition, a backslash-leftbrace @code{ \@{
} read verbatim all characters up to the first rightbrace @code{ @}
}. A string with the last doublequote followed by an underscore like
@code{"do that"_} is localized using the @code{gettext} host system
function; this could be useful for some user messages (to be
translated to other languages like french).

@item symbols
 (i.e. identifiers) are case insensitive and may contain non
alphanumerical characters like @code{_+-*/<>=!?:%~&@@$}. It is advised
to use these special characters sparingly. Symbols cannot start with
any of @code{?%}. Because symbols are related to their C translation,
is advised to avoid digits after underscores in symbols like
@code{x_12} and to have each symbol contain at least one letter
(e.g. use @code{<i} instead of @code{<}).

@item the quote character 
@code{'} is special. @code{'x} is parsed the same as @code{(quote x)}.

@item the backquote character 
@code{`} is special. @code{`x} means the same as @code{(backquote x)}

@item the comma character 
@code{,} is special. So @code{,x} means @code{(comma x)} and @code{,(a
b)} is @code{(comma (a b))}

@item the question mark chararacter 
@code{?} is special when is is the first of a token (it may appear
inside a symbol otherwise). For instance, @code{?x} means
@code{(question x)} but @code{x?} is a symbol of two characters. So
@code{?y?} is bad taste but means @code{(question y?)}

@item the hash character 
@code{#} is special. In particular, @code{#|} starts multiline
comments; @code{#\space} is the integer code of the space character;
@code{#b10} is a binary number (i.e. two), @code{#o12} is octal (ie
ten), @code{#xffff} is hexadecimal number (ie 65535). @code{#@{}
starts macrostrings.

@item macro strings
@cindex macro string in MELT
To avoid escaping many C-like caracters in C code chunks used for
primitives, c-iterators, c-matchers etc.. an alternative multi-line
lexical construct exist: the macro string started with @code{#@{} and
ending with @code{@}#} possibly on a different line with @code{$}
escapes like in C. For example, the @code{ #@{if ($A>0) printf("%s",
$B);@}# } macrostring is parsed exactly as the 5-elements s-expression
@code{ ("if (" A ">0) printf(\"%s\", " B ");")}. In a macrostring, all
caracters are taken as is, except the dollar sign @code{$}; the
macro-string itself is always read as an S-expr. When a dollar is
followed by alphanumerical (or underscore) caracters like a C
identifier, it is parsed as a symbol. If it is followed by an hash
@code{#} caracter, that hash-character is skipped and terminate the
symbol. The @code{$.} sequence is skipped and ignored, the
double-dollar @code{$$} is read as a single dollar, the @code{$#} is
read as a single hash @code{#}.

@item braces 
@code{@{} and @code{@}} are special.


@item numbers
are integers in decimal like @code{-123} or @code{+22} or
@code{33}. Notice that @code{1.2} is illegal; it is not a floating
point number.

@item colons 
(i.e. @code{:}) starts constant (lisp-like) keywords which always evaluate to themselves.

@end itemize

Contrarily to some or most other Lisp dialects:

@itemize @minus

@item don't use the dot 
for cons-ing, e.g. @code{(a b . c)} is not legal.

@item strings 
may contain escaped braces with special verbatim-like meaning.

@item a string 
whose ending doublequote is immediately followed by an underscore
(e.g. @code{"example of international"_}) is localized by calling
@code{gettext} at read time.

@end itemize


@c =======================================================================

@node Main MELT syntax and features
@subsection Main MELT syntax and features

We list each key symbol in alphabetical order and provide a short
derscription. Familiarity with some Lisp or Scheme dialect is
required.

@menu
* MELT formals::
* MELT ctypes::
* MELT boxed values::
* MELT objects and classes::
* MELT function application::
* MELT function abstraction and closures::
* MELT message sending::
* MELT syntax constructs::
@end menu



@node MELT formals
@subsubsection MELT formals

A formal argument list is a possibly empty list (between
parenthesis). This list contains either ctype keywords or formal
names. A ctype keyword apply to all further formals (until another
ctype keyword, or end of formal arguments list. Ctypes have a keyword
and are each described by a predefined instance (of
@code{CLASS_CTYPE}) with a name conventionnally starting with
@code{ctype_}.
@cindex ctype MELT keyword
[For experts: to add a new ctype, define a @code{BGLOB_CTYPE_*}
predefined in @file{gcc/melt.h} and an instance in
@file{warmelt-first.melt} using @code{install_ctype_descr}, then
regenerate all the @file{gcc/warmelt-*.c} files]

@node MELT ctypes
@subsubsection MELT ctypes

Here are the list of ctype-s.
@cindex ctype in MELT

@itemize
@item @code{:value} (ctype instance @code{ctype_value})
This ctype is for MELT [boxed] values. It is the default ctype of arguments.

@item @code{:long} (ctype instance @code{ctype_long})
This ctype is for unboxed long integers; it is also used for conditions and tests.

@item @code{:tree} (ctype instance @code{ctype_tree})
This ctype is for GCC @code{tree} raw pointers, as in @file{gcc/tree.h}.

@item @code{:gimple} (ctype instance @code{ctype_gimple})
This ctype is for GCC @code{gimple} raw tuple pointers, as in @file{gcc/gimple.h}.

@item @code{:gimpleseq}  (ctype instance @code{ctype_gimple})
This ctype is for GCC @code{gimple_seq} raw pointers, representing
sequences of gimple instructions, as in @file{gcc/gimple.h}

@item @code{:basicblock}  (ctype instance @code{ctype_basicblock})
This ctype is for GCC @code{basic_block} raw pointers, representing
basic blocks, as in @file{gcc/basic-block.h}

@item @code{:edge}  (ctype instance @code{ctype_edge})
This ctype is for GCC @code{edge} raw pointers, representing edges of
the control flow graph, as in @file{gcc/basic-block.h}

@item @code{:void}  (ctype instance @code{ctype_void})
This ctype is the same as C @code{void} type. It should not be the
type of formal arguments. It is only useful as the result type of
side-effecting primitives.

@item @code{:cstring} (ctype instance @code{ctype_cstring})
This ctype is only for constant strings (like @code{const char[]} in
C). It is not possible to build an unboxed @code{:cstring}. Every
@code{:cstring} variable may only be bound to constant strings (not to
something inside some heap).

@end itemize

MELT formal arguments appear in @code{lambda defun defprimitive
defciterator multicall} forms. The first formal argument of
@code{defun lambda multicall} constructs should -if given- be a
@code{:value}. Ctype-s also appear in @code{let} bindings. Each MELT
expression (or constant or variable) has a ctype (usually
@code{:value}).

The @code{:value} ctype is the only ctype for boxed values. Every
other ctype is for unboxed stuff.


@node MELT boxed values
@subsubsection MELT boxed values

@cindex minor MELT garbage collection
@cindex full MELT garbage collection
@cindex values in MELT
@cindex boxed values in MELT

Most data manipulated by MELT code are values. Values are allocated in
the nursery generation of MELT heap, and are later (if alive) copied
into GGC heap. A @emph{minor MELT garbage collection}, which runs
quickly and often, only copies live values (in particular, local
variables of MELT functions) out of the nursery, into the GGC heap. A
@emph{full MELT garbage collection} also invokes the GGC collector, so
scans the entire heap.

MELT boxed values can be one of:

@itemize

@item nil
@cindex nil MELT value
(represented by the C @code{NULL} pointer and noted @code{()} in MELT)
is a value. It is the initial or default value everywhere.

@item multiples 
@cindex multiple MELT value
(or MELT tuples) - they are a fixed array of values agglomerated as a
multiple.

@item closures
@cindex closure MELT value
(or MELT functional values) represent a functional value, containing a
routine and closed values; the only way of making closures is thru the
@code{lambda} and @code{defun} syntactic constructs.

@item routines
@cindex routine MELT value
are the reification of MELT functions (generated internally).

@item lists
@cindex list MELT value
are singly linked lists of pairs. Efficient access to the first and
last pair of the list are provided. Unlike in many other Lisps, lists
are not simply pairs (but implemented as the grouping of the first and
last pair contained in the list), so appending a list to another one,
or a single value at the beginning or the end of a list, is a simple
operation. Lists are never circular and have a finite length.

@item pairs
@cindex pair MELT value
are like CONS pairs in most other Lisps. In particular, a list knows
its first and last pair. The head of a pair is an arbitrary boxed
value, but its tail is a pair or nil. 

@item triples
@cindex triple MELT value
(rarely used) have arbitrary head and middle values, but the tail is a
triple or nil. They could be used like A-lists' nodes in Lisp.

@item integers
@cindex integer MELT value
(are actually boxed longs).

@item strings
@cindex string MELT value
(are like boxed cstrings; they are immutable, so the characters inside
them do not change; they are terminated by a null byte, like in C).

@item string-buffers
@cindex string-buffer MELT value
(are mutable buffers of strings and may grow appropriately; they are a
bit like C++ string streams).

@item boxes
@cindex box MELT value
(like references in ML, are mutable boxed containers).

@item objects
@cindex object MELT value
have values in their fields (or slots) and are described below; each
MELT object has a class (which is also a MELT object), which are
organized in a single-inheritance class hierarchy rooted at
@code{CLASS_ROOT}.

@item mixints
@cindex mixints MELT value
are mixing an arbitrary mutable MELT value and an integer.

@item mixlocs
@cindex mixlocs MELT value
(for experts; they are mixing an arbitrary mutable MELT value and a
@code{location_t} indicating a location inside e.g. a MELT or C source
file).

@item object maps
@cindex object map MELT value
are an hashtable association between MELT objects and arbitrary MELT
non-null [boxed] values.

@item string maps
@cindex string map MELT value
are an hashtable dictionnary mapping strings to arbitrary non-null
MELT values.

@item boxed ctypes
@cindex boxed ctype MELT value
Each @emph{ctype} has its boxed representation, which is a value
containing the raw (unboxed) @emph{ctype} like @code{gimple} etc..

@item boxed ctype maps
@cindex boxed ctype map MELT value
Each @emph{ctype} [except @code{:long :void :cstring}] has its boxed
map, an hash table associating (non-null) stuff of the given ctype
with arbitrary non-null MELT [boxed] values. For example, a gimple map
associate GCC @code{gimple}s to arbitrary MELT non-null values
(usually MELT objects). This is very useful to represent a
relationship (conceptually an attribute) between @code{gimple}s and
MELT values such as objects without having to enhance the definition
of the @code{gimple} structure inside @file{gcc/gimple.h}

@item special values
@cindex special MELT values
They are useful to represent stuff like MPFR things (arbitrary
precision numbers), PPL coefficients, etc@dots{} The MELT runtime is able
to run a sort of destructing C function when a special value is no
more used, so the handling of special values is more expensive than
for other values.

@end itemize

Notice that (contrarily to most other lisps) MELT symbols and MELT
s-expressions are both objects (respectively of class
@code{CLASS_SYMBOL} and @code{CLASS_SEXPR}). The reader function
(which is not as versatile as in CommonLisp) deals with them.

Adding additional MELT value types require enhancing the
@file{gcc/melt.h} and @file{gcc/melt.c} files.

@cindex discriminant for MELT values
Each MELT [boxed] value starts with a @emph{discriminant}. This
discriminant is a MELT object (it cannot be nil). The nil value has
conceptually its own discriminant @code{DISCR_NULLRECV}, but is of
course represented by C @code{NULL} pointer. Discriminants are used by
the garbage collector (precisely to discriminate various MELT boxed
data types using the object number of their discriminant), and by the
MELT message sending machinery (hence messages sent to the nil MELT
value are processed using the @code{DISCR_NULLRECV}
discriminant). Each kind of MELT value has its own discriminant, but
sometimes it is useful to have several discriminants possible for the
same kind of MELT value. For example, MELT strings can have
@code{DISCR_STRING} or @code{DISCR_VERBATIMSTRING} etc., and verbatim
strings are handled specially (in particular when printing them inside
generated C code). Every MELT [boxed] value has an immutable
discriminant, set at the time of the value's creation.

Conventionally MELT non-object values have a primitive to test them
called like @code{is_*}, a primitive to build them called like
@code{make_*} [which takes a discriminant as the first argument], and
the accessing and modifying primitives share a common prefix. In
particular, object maps are tested with @code{is_mapobject}, built
with @code{make_mapobject}, accessed with @code{mapobject_get} and
updated using the @code{mapobject_put} and @code{mapobject_remove}
primitives. For more details, look into file
@file{gcc/melt/warmelt-first.melt}.


@node MELT objects and classes
@subsubsection MELT objects and classes

@cindex object MELT values
@cindex MELT objects

An important (and common) kind of MELT [boxed] values are MELT
objects. A MELT object contains exactly

@itemize
@item the discriminant or class 
@cindex MELT classes
@cindex class in MELT
of the object; as every [boxed] value, MELT objects starts with a
discriminant; for objects, it is their @emph{class}, which is an
object itself. We say ``@var{Cl} is the class of @var{Ob}'' or
equivalently ``@var{Ob} is a [direct] instance of @var{Cl}'' when
@var{Ob} is a MELT object of discriminant @var{Cl}.

@item the hash code 
of the object is an unsigned non-zero (more or less random, immutable
i.e. fixed) integer, given at object build time (i.e. instanciation
time).

@item the object number 
or @emph{objnum} of the object is a small unsigned short integer. It
is usually assigned at object build time. For discriminants @var{Di},
their objnum is also called the @emph{magic number} of the values
@var{Va} of the given discriminant @var{Di}.

@item the object length
or size is the number of slots or fields of the objects. All objects
@var{Ob} of a given class @var{Cl} have the same fixed number of slots
(no more than 32767 slots and almost always a lot less, e.g. at most a
dozen). Some objects could have a length of 0 (if their class is the
@code{CLASS_ROOT} or has no direct or inherited fields), but this is
very unusual.

@item the object slots 
or object fields are the values contained inside the object. These
fields may be mutable; their number is fixed (it is the object
length).

@end itemize

In practice, every object's slot is described by a field object (of
class @code{CLASS_FIELD}) inside the object's class.

Every discriminant (in particular every class) is an object with the following fields (or slots):
@itemize
@item @code{prop_table}
is the property object map associating objects to values, and usable as a P-list.

@item @code{named_name}
is the boxed string naming the discriminant.

@item @code{disc_methodict}
is an object map associating selectors to closures (method implementations).

@item @code{disc_super}
is the super-discriminant (or the super-class for objects)

@end itemize

The root discriminant is @code{DISCR_ANYRECV}. The discriminant of the
nil value is @code{DISCR_NULLRECV}. Other types of values have
discriminants like @code{DISCR_ANYRECV DISCR_BASICBLOCK DISCR_BOX
DISCR_CHARINTEGER DISCR_CLOSURE DISCR_EDGE DISCR_GIMPLE
DISCR_GIMPLESEQ DISCR_INTEGER DISCR_LIST DISCR_MAPBASICBLOCKS
DISCR_MAPEDGES DISCR_MAPGIMPLES DISCR_MAPGIMPLESEQS DISCR_MAPOBJECTS
DISCR_MAPSTRINGS DISCR_MAPTREES DISCR_METHODMAP DISCR_MIXEDINT
DISCR_MIXEDLOC DISCR_MULTIPLE DISCR_NAMESTRING DISCR_NULLRECV
DISCR_PAIR DISCR_ROUTINE DISCR_SEQCLASS DISCR_SEQFIELD DISCR_STRBUF
DISCR_STRING DISCR_TREE DISCR_VERBATIMSTRING}.  Some discriminants are
specialized by having a meaningful (i.e. not @code{DISCR_ANYRECV})
super-discriminant (i.e. the value inside the @code{:disc_super}
slot). For example, @code{DISCR_METHODMAP} is used for object maps
which are method maps (mapping a selector to a function implementing a
method), instead of the plain @code{DISCR_MAPOBJECTS}.  [For experts:]
It is possible to make additional discriminants using
@code{definstance} with @code{CLASS_DISCR} as the class.

Classes are discriminants, but in addition have the following fields
(or slots):
@itemize
@item @code{class_ancestors}
is the multiple (of discriminant @code{DISCR_SEQCLASS}) of the
classes' ancestors. Testing that a given object has some given class
as its direct class or indirect ancestor is quick (@code{is_a}
primitive in MELT, @code{melt_is_instance_of} function in C code).

@item @code{class_fields}
is the multiple (of @code{DISCR_SEQFIELD}) of the classes' fields
(both inherited from ancestors or own to the class).

@item @code{class_objnumdescr}
is usable for describing the objnum of instances.

@item @code{class_data}
is an additional slot for holding class data.
@end itemize


Fields are slot descriptors (objects of @code{CLASS_FIELD}), they are
named (so inherit fields @code{prop_table named_name}). Their objnum
is their index, their specific slots are
@itemize
@item @code{fld_ownclass}
gives the class defining the field.
@item @code{fld_typinfo}
can be used for describing the field's type in instances.
@end itemize

Beware that the structure of classes, fields and discriminants is
described not only in @file{warmelt-first.melt} but also ``built-in''
in files @file{melt.c} and @file{melt.h} so changing them is
very tricky.

Fields should have a @emph{globally unique} name. Conventionally,
fields common to the same class share a common prefix for their name.

The @code{defclass} construct builds and fills class and fields
objects. Don't make instances of @code{CLASS_CLASS} or
@code{CLASS_FIELD} otherwise!

Objects are built using the @code{make_instance} construct, or
statically using @code{definstance}. In addition, @code{defselector
defclass} also statically build objects (likes classes and fields).

Exporting a class means exporting the class object and its own fields.

@node MELT function application
@subsubsection MELT function application

Function applications are noted @code{(@var{fun} @var{args}
@var{@dots{}})}. There may be no arguments, e.g. just
@code{(@var{fun})}. If arguments are given, the first argument must be
a @code{:value}. So @code{(f 1 x)} is incorrect (because @code{1} is
an unboxed @code{:long}); use @code{(f x 1)} instead. Usually, the
@var{fun}ction is just a variable bound to a function, but it may be a
more complex expression, like @code{((if (p x) f g) x y)} which,
depending on the test @code{(p x)} applies either @code{f} or @code{g}
to @code{x y}.

The application of a non-function returns null. The
@code{melt_apply} C function doing the application checks that the
applied function is indeed a function (ie a closure). Function
applications are never tail-recursive; they always consume some stack
space.

Named functions are defined using the @code{defun} construct, using a
Common Lisp like syntax (not the Scheme @code{define}). If the formal
arguments list is not empty, its first element (the first formal
argument of a named or anonymous function) should be a @code{:value}.

Functions are not polytopic nor polymorphic; their signature is
essentially fixed. They should expect a fixed number of arguments
[there is no variable argument facility in MELT], each with a defined
ctype (the first argument should be a @code{:value}), and return a
fixed number of results (the first result should be a @code{:value})
each with a defined ctype. An argument which has not the expected
ctype or is missing is initialized to null or 0. Likewise a secundary
result which has not the expected ctype is ignored or set to null or
0.

A function should [always] return a primary result of ctype
@code{:value} and may also return secondary results (using the
@code{return} construct). The only way of getting the secondary
results of a function call (or a message send) is thrue the
@code{multicall} construct, which binds all the results of the call or
send to the formal arguments in the @code{multicall}. Function
applications not done in a @code{multicall} have all their secondary
results (if any) ignored.

@node MELT function abstraction and closures
@subsubsection MELT function abstraction and closures

Function abstraction (i.e. making anonymous functions) is done using
the @code{lambda} construct. @emph{Only values can be closed}, hence
it is not possible to close a non-boxed value, so @code{(let ( (:long
one 1) ) (lambda (a) (f a one)))} is incorrect (and rejected by the
MELT translator).

Actually, every MELT function is really a closure, so @code{defun}
binds a name to the closure which is the named function.


Closures are @code{:value}s. Use the @code{is_closure} primitive to
test tha a given value is indeed a closure. The only way of building
closures is thru @code{lambda} or @code{defun}. Closures contain a
routine pointer (routines are also @code{:values}) and closed
values. [For experts] the size of a closure is available thru the
@code{closure_size} primitive. Its routine is available thru
@code{closure_routine} primitive. To get its n-th closed value, use
the @code{closure_nth} primitive. At MELT runtime, each MELT call
frame for MELT function application (or message sending) knows its
closure.

Routines correspond to MELT generated C functions (with their constant
values).


@node MELT message sending
@subsubsection MELT message sending

A message invocation is done using the construct
@code{(@var{selector-name} @var{reciever} @var{args} @var{@dots{}})}. This
construct is syntactically the same as function (or primitive)
application, and is discriminated by the fact that the
@var{selector-name} has been previously defined with
@code{defselector} or is imported as bound to an instance of
@code{CLASS_SELECTOR}. The selector should be such a name and cannot
be an expression. The @var{reciever} can be any @code{:value} (even
null). The @var{args} are optional and can have any ctype (but a
selector should have a fixed and well defined signature). Use
@code{export_values} to export selectors.

A method is just a functional value, installed thru the
@code{install_method} function. This function expects a discriminant
or class, a selector, and a function (the method). Method installation
is very dynamic and can be done at any time.

A message invocation (i.e. an expression starting with a selector) can
be done on any boxed value. If it is an object, its class is used;
otherwise its discriminant is used (so @code{DISCR_NULLRECV} is used
when sending to nil). To send a message of selector @var{sel} (an
instance of @code{CLASS_SELECTOR}) to a reciever @var{recv} of
discriminant (e.g. the class of an object) @var{dis}, the following
procedure is used:

@itemize

@item @var{dis} should be a discriminant;
if it is not an instance of @code{CLASS_DISCR}, stop and do nothing.

@item get the @code{discr_methodmap} slot of @var{dis}; 
it should be an object map (i.e. a ``dictionnary'' of methods) that we
call @var{md}.

@item get the method @var{meth} 
associated to @var{sel} in @var{md}; if @var{meth} is a function
(i.e. a boxed MELT closure), apply @var{meth} to the reciever
@var{recv} and any additional arguments. This ends the message
invocation.

@item otherwise,
no method is found, so replace @var{dis} by its super-discriminant
(its slot @code{disc_super}) and repeat again. Hence, methods are also
looked in superclasses, etc@dots{} so are properly inherited.

@end itemize

Notice that message invocation is more dynamic (hence slower) than
e.g. C++ virtual member functions, and that method maps can be
upgraded at any time.

@node MELT syntax constructs
@subsubsection MELT syntax constructs

The table below gives MELT syntax constructs, in alphabetical
order. [Experts can add new constructs using macros, and implementing
appropriate methods in the MELT translator].

@table @code

@item and
@cindex @code{and} MELT syntax
@code{(and @var{e1} @var{e2} @var{e3} @var{@dots{}})} is (like in all
Lisps) used for sequential conjunction; it is the same as @code{(if
@var{e1} (if @var{e2} @var{e3}))} etc@dots{} Any number (at least one) of
conjuncts are possible. All the conjuncts (@var{e1} @var{@dots{}}) should
have the same ctype (usually @code{:value}).

@item assert_msg
@cindex @code{assert_msg} MELT syntax
@cindex @code{assert_failed} MELT primitive
@code{(assert_msg @var{msg} @var{check})} aborts when @var{check} is
false (using the @code{assert_failed} primitive, giving the source file
position) and displays the given @var{msg}, when GCC is built for
debugging with @code{ENABLE_CHECK}. If GCC is not built for debugging,
neither operand is used. The entire @code{assert_msg} expression
evaluates to nil.

@item comment
@cindex @code{comment} MELT syntax
@code{(comment @var{msg})} evaluates to nil and output the @var{msg}
as a C comment in the C translation. Don't use @code{*/} or @code{*/}
in @var{msg}. When a @code{comment} appears at the beginning of a MELT
compilation unit, it appears at the beginning of the generated C file;
this is useful for making copyright notices appear both in the MELT
source file and the generated C code.

@item compile_warning
@cindex @code{compile_warning} MELT syntax
@code{(compile_warning @var{msg} @var{exp})} evaluates like @var{exp} but also
emits a message at MELT compilation time. Intended use is similar to
@code{#warning} in C.

@item cond
@cindex @code{cond} MELT syntax
@code{(cond @var{condition1} @var{condition2} @var{@dots{}})} is -like in
all Lisps- a conditional evaluation. Each condition is
@code{(@var{test} @var{then1} @var{then2} @var{@dots{}} @var{thenk})} so
the @var{test} is evaluated. If it is true, all the @var{then}s are
evaluated in sequence, and the last is the result of the whole
@code{cond} expression. The last condition can be @code{(:else
@var{else1} @var{@dots{}} @var{elsek})}; if no previous test succeeded,
all the @var{else}s are sequentially evaluated, and the last of them
is the whole @code{cond} result. Notice that @code{(cond (@var{test1}
@var{then1}) (@var{test2} @var{then2a} @var{then2b}) (:else
@var{else1} @var{else2} @var{else3}))} is the same as @code{(if
@var{test1} @var{then1} (if @var{test2} (progn @var{then2a}
@var{then2b}) (progn @var{else1} @var{else2})))}.

@item cppif
@cindex @code{cppif} MELT syntax
[for experts] @code{(cppif @var{name} @var{then-cpp} @var{else-cpp})} is translated
using a C directive @code{#if @var{name}} to the translation of
@var{then-cpp} or @var{else-cpp}.

@item current_module_environment_container
@cindex @code{current_module_environment_container} MELT syntax
[for experts] @code{(current_module_environment_container)} evaluates
to an object of @code{CLASS_CONTAINER} containing the current module
environment.

@item debug_msg
@cindex @code{debug_msg} MELT syntax
@code{(debug_msg @var{expv} @var{msg} [@var{count}])} -where the
@var{count} expression (of ctype @code{:long}) is usually ommitted- is
useful for debugging ouput of the value of @var{expv} (with the
@code{-fmelt-debug} program option) to output, using the
@code{debug_msg_fun} function. The entire @code{debug_msg} expression
is somehow equivalent to @code{(cppif ENABLE_CHECKING (debug_msg_fun
@var{expv msg count filename lineno}) ())} and evaluates to nil.

@item defciterator
@cindex @code{defciterator} MELT syntax
The form @code{(defciterator @var{iter-name} @var{start-formals}
@var{state-symbol} @var{local-formals} @var{before-expansion}
@var{after-expansion})} defines a C-iterator named
@var{iter-name}. The @var{start-formals} is a [binding] list of formal
arguments [given to the C-iterator].  The @var{state-symbol} is usable
in the expansions, where it is expanded to a unique C identifier. The
@var{local-formals} is a [binding] list of variables local to the
expanded block. The @var{before-expansion} and @var{after-expansion}
are lists of items like strings (appearing as is in the C expansion)
or symbols (either from the start formals, or the local formals, or
the state symbol).

@item defclass
@cindex @code{defclass} MELT syntax
The form @code{(defclass @var{class-name} [:predef @var{predefined}]
[:super @var{superclass-name}] :fields @var{fields-list})} defines a
class named @var{class-name} of super-class named
@var{superclass-name} with the given @var{fields-list} (a list of
field names) and an optional @var{predefined} name (for predefined
classes [giving a @var{predefined} is for experts]).

@item defcmatcher
@cindex @code{defcmatcher} MELT syntax.
The form @code{(defcmatcher @var{cmatcher-name} @var{match&in-formals}
@var{out-formals} @var{state-sym} @var{test-expansion}
@var{fill-expansion} @var{oper-expansion})} defined a matching
construct by its C translation. The @var{match&in-formals} gives the
matched thing ctype (as the first formal argument, either a boxed
value or a raw stuff) and input arguments (rest of formals). The
@var{out-formals} are the signature of the deconstructed things.  The
@var{test-expansion} expands (as a C boolean-like expression) to the
test part of the match.  The @var{fill-expansion} expands (as a
sequence of C instructions) to the deconstructing part. The
@var{oper-expansion} is used, much like in primitives, when the
@var{cmatcher-name} appears as an operator in an expression context.

@item definstance
@cindex @code{definstance} MELT syntax
The form @code{(definstance @var{instance-name} @var{class-name}
[:predef @var{predefined}] [:obj_num @var{object-number}]
@var{:field-name} @var{field-value} @var{@dots{}})} statically defines an
instance of name @var{instance-name} of the class
@var{class-name}. [expert usage: a @var{predefined} name and an
@var{object-number} may also be given].

@item defprimitive
@cindex @code{defprimitive} MELT syntax
The form @code{(defprimitive @var{primitive-name}
@var{formals-arglist} @var{ctype} @var{expansion} @var{@dots{}})}
statically defines a C primitive named @var{primitive-name} of a given
@var{formals-list} and given return @var{ctype}. The @var{expansion}-s
are either strings or formal names.

@item defselector
@cindex @code{defselector} MELT syntax
The form @code{(defprimitive @var{selector-name} @var{selector-class}
@var{:field-name} @var{field-value} @var{@dots{}})} defines a
selector. Usually @var{selector-class} is @code{CLASS_SELECTOR}, and
no other @var{field}s are given. Once a name is bound to a selector,
every further occurrence of that name in operator position is
considered as a message invocation.

@item defun
@cindex @code{defun} MELT syntax
The form @code{(defun @var{function-name} @var{formals-list}
@var{body} @var{@dots{}})} define a function named
@code{function-name}. The ctype of the first (if any) formal argument
(in the @var{formals-list}) should be a @code{:value}. The
@code{function-name} can appear in the given @var{body} (for
recursion).

@item exit
@cindex @code{exit} MELT syntax
The form @code{(exit @var{loop-label} @var{expr} @var{@dots{}})}, only
used inside @code{forever} loops, causes the lexically enclosing
@code{forever} loop named by @var{loop-label} to be exited, after
evaluation of the @var{expr}s. The last such value (or nil if no
@var{expr} is given) is the result returned by the @code{forever}
loop. @code{exit} forms are similar to Ada's @code{exit} or C
@code{break} (not to @code{longjmp}). The @code{exit} should be local
to the containing procedure: it cannot jump across @code{lambda}s.

@item export_class
@cindex @code{export_class} MELT syntax
The form @code{(export_class @var{class-name} @var{@dots{}})} export all
the given @var{class-name}s and their fields.

@item export_macro
@cindex @code{export_macro} MELT syntax
[For experts] The form @code{(export_macro @var{macro-symbol}
@var{expander})} exports a macro binding for the given
@var{macro-symbol} with the @var{expander} function. The macro
@code{macro-symbol} is defined in the environment exported by the
current module, so is available in other modules only (but not in the
current one).

@item export_patmacro
@cindex @code{export_patmacro} MELT syntax
[For experts, not implemented] The form @code{(export_patmacro
@var{patmacro-symbol} @var{pat-expander} @var{mac-expander})} exports
a pattern macro binding for the given @var{patmacro-symbol} with the
@var{pat-expander} as a pattern expanding function (used in patterns)
and the @var{mac-expander} as a macro expanding function (used in
expressions).

@item export_values
@cindex @code{export_values} MELT syntax
The form @code{(export_values @var{exported-name} @var{@dots{}})} export
all the names, as values, given as arguments. For classes,
@code{export_class} should be used, otherwise the fields are not
exported.

@item fetch_predefined
@cindex @code{fetch_predefined} MELT syntax
[For experts] @code{(fetch_predefined @var{predefined-name-or-number})}

@item forever
@cindex @code{forever} MELT syntax
@code{(forever @var{label-name} @var{body} @var{@dots{}})}  when
evaluated, the bodies are evaluated in sequence, and indefinitely
re-evaluated again. The only way of getting out from a @code{forever}
loop is with @code{exit} (using the given @var{label-name}, lexically
inside the body) or @code{return}. Avoid using a bound variable name
as a @var{label-name}.

@item get_field
@cindex @code{get_field} MELT syntax
@code{(unsafe_get_field @var{:field-name} @var{expr})} retrieves the
field named @var{:field-name} from the object returned by @var{expr}
expression. If it is not an appropriate object (of the class owning
the @var{:field-name}) , gives nil.

@item if
@cindex @code{if} MELT syntax
@code{(if @var{test} @var{then-exp} [@var{else-exp}])}. When
evaluated, the @var{test} is first evaluated. If it is true, the
@var{then-exp} is evaluated and is the result of the whole
@code{if}. If it is false (either 0 if ctype-d @code{:long}, or the
null pointer for @code{:value} and other ctypes), the optional
@var{else-exp} is evaluated (or 0 or null) and is the result of the
whole @code{if}. Both the @var{then-exp} and the @var{else-exp} (if
given) should have the same ctype.

@item instance
@cindex @code{instance} MELT syntax
@code{(instance @var{class-name} [@var{:field-name} @var{field-value}]
@var{@dots{}})} where the @var{class-name} is the name of a class (it
cannot be a complex expression but should be a class statically known)
and where each @var{:field-name} keyword (starting with a colon) is
the name of some field (direct or inherited) of the class and the
following @var{field-value} is an expression giving its initial value;
the result of @code{instance} is a freshly built instance of the given
@var{class-name} initialized with the fields (fields which are not
mentionned are initialized with nil). @code{make_instance} is a
deprecated synonym of @code{instance}.

@item lambda
@cindex @code{lambda} MELT syntax
@code{(lambda @var{formal-args} @var{body} @var{@dots{}})} is a function
abstraction, it returns a closure, the anonymous function taking
@var{formal-args} as arguments and evaluating sequentially the
@var{body} expressions, returning the value of the last one. The first
argument of a function and the first result that it is returning
should be a @code{:value}.

@item let
@cindex @code{let} MELT syntax
@code{(let (@var{let-binding} @var{@dots{}}) @var{body} @var{@dots{}}) is a
sequential binding construct (closer to @code{let*} in other
Lisps)}. The first operand should be a list of
@var{let-binding}s. Others operands make the @var{body}, evaluated in
sequence with the new bindings applied with lexical scoping. A
@var{let-binding} is an optional @emph{ctype} (@code{:value} by
default) followed by a variable name (ie a symbol) followed by one
expression. Variables bound by previous @var{let-binding}s are visible
in the expression inside the current @var{let-binding} (so recursion
is not permitted like with @code{flet} or @code{letrec} in some
Lisps). Notice that a @var{let-binding} can bind a variable to unboxed
stuff (like a plain long integer). The result of the whole @code{let}
expression is the result of the evaluation of the last body
expression, done with the new bindings.

@item make_instance
@cindex @code{make_instance} MELT syntax
[Deprecated] @code{(make_instance @var{class-name} [@var{:field-name}
@var{field-value}] @var{@dots{}})} is a deprecated equivalent of
@code{instance} MELT syntax @code{(make_instance @var{class-name}
[@var{:field-name} @var{field-value}] @var{@dots{}})}

@item match
@cindex @code{match} MELT syntax
@code{(match @var{expr} @var{match-case} @var{@dots{}} )} @emph{NOT
IMPLEMENTED YET} Do a pattern match. Evaluate @var{expr} and for the
first maching @var{match-case}, do its body. There is no @code{:else}
clause, use the joker pattern @code{?_} for that purpose. A
@var{match-case} is a simple match case @code{(@var{pattern}
@var{body} @var{@dots{}})} where @var{body} is evaluated with the
pattern variables appearing in @var{pattern} bound. A @var{match-cas}
can be a when match case @code{(:when @var{pattern} @var{when-cond}
@var{body} @var{@dots{}})} where the body is done when that pattern
matches and the @var{when-cond} (evaluated with the pattern variables
bound) is a true condition.

@item multicall
@cindex @code{multicall} MELT syntax
@code{(multicall (@var{result-formals}) @var{call-expr} @var{body}
@var{@dots{}})}  is the only way to retrieve multiple (one primary and
some secondary) results from a function application or a message
invocation @var{call-expr} (which should syntactically be an
application or an invocation, not anything else). The
@var{result-formals} are syntactically like formal arguments;
@xref{MELT formals}. The first result formal should be of ctype
@code{:value}. Secondary result formals which are not matching the
ctype of the actual secondary result are cleared. The bindings of the
result formals are local to the @code{multicall} expression and usable
in the @var{body} sequence.

@item or
@cindex @code{or} MELT syntax
@code{(or @var{e1} @var{e2} @var{e3} @var{@dots{}})} is the sequential
disjunction of @var{e1} @var{@dots{}} (at least one disjunct). In
particular @code{(or @var{a} @var{b})} is the same as @code{(if
@var{a} @var{a} @var{b})} except that @var{a} is evaluated once. All
the disjuncts should have the same ctype (usually @code{:value}).

@item parent_module_environment
@cindex @code{parent_module_environment} MELT syntax
[For experts] @code{(parent_module_environment)} return the parent
module's environment.

@item progn
@cindex @code{progn} MELT syntax
@code{(progn @var{e1} @var{e2} @var{@dots{}} @var{en})} evaluates
successfully @var{e1} then @var{e2} and return the value of the last
@var{en}.

@item put_fields
@cindex @code{put_fields} MELT syntax.
@code{(put_fields @var{obj} @var{:field-name1} @var{val1}
@var{@dots{}})}  updates the object value of @var{obj} by changing its
field named @var{:field-name1} to the value of @var{val1} etc@dots{}
(all the fields are updated at once). It is safe, in the sense that if
@var{obj} is not an object of the appropriate class, nothing happens.

@item quote
@cindex @code{quote} MELT syntax
@code{(quote x)} is the same as @code{'x} and returns the symbol
@code{x} itself (as an instance of
@code{CLASS_SYMBOL}). [Expert]Currently, only symbols can be
quoted. But @code{'1} and @code{'"string"} should be a way to express
static boxed values [unimplemented].


@item return
@cindex @code{return} MELT syntax
@code{(return @var{e1} @var{@dots{}})} return from the entire containing
function (i.e. @code{defun} or @code{lambda}). The first expression
@var{e1} should be of ctype @code{:value} and is evaluated as the
primary result. Other expressions are evaluated (and can have
different ctypes) and returned as secondary results. A @code{(return)}
without argument is a convenience for returning the nil value. The
ctype of the @code{return} is @code{:value} even if the @code{return}
expression itself does not gives a value (because it breaks the
control flow), hence @code{(or (return) 'x)} is acceptable but
tasteless.

@item setq
@cindex @code{setq} MELT syntax
@code{(setq @var{var} @var{exp})} assigns to the local variable
@var{var} the value of @var{exp} (which is also the value of the
entire @code{setq} expression). Both @var{var} and @var{exp} should
have the same ctype.

@item store_predefined
@cindex @code{store_predefined} MELT syntax
[Expert] @code{(store_predefined @var{predef-name-or-number} @var{expr})}
Don't use it if you don't understand.

@item unsafe_get_field
@cindex @code{unsafe_get_field} MELT syntax
@code{(unsafe_get_field @var{:field-name} @var{expr})} retrieves the
field named @var{:field-name} from the object returned by @var{expr}
expression (of ctype @code{:value}). If @var{expr} does not evaluates
to an object instance (directly or indirectly) of the class defining
the @var{:field-name} the behavior is undefined, and unsafe (GCC
usually crashes).

@item unsafe_put_fields
@cindex @code{unsafe_put_fields} MELT syntax
@code{(unsafe_put_fields @var{obj} @var{:field-name1} @var{val1}
@var{@dots{}})}  updates the object value of @var{obj} by changing its
field named @var{:field-name1} to the value of @var{val1} etc@dots{} (all
the fields are updated at once). If @var{obj} is not an object of the
appropriate class for the fields, the behavior is undefined and unsafe
(usually GCC crashes).

@item update_current_module_environment_container
@cindex @code{update_current_module_environment_container} MELT syntax
[Expert] @code{(update_current_module_environment_container)} don't
use it if you don't understand.

@end table


@node MELT modules and translation
@subsection MELT modules and translation

[for experts mostly; familiarity with the notions of bindings and
environments is expected.]

@menu 
* MELT environments and bindings::
* translating a MELT module::
* MELT module initialization and exports::
* MELT translation steps::
@end menu

@node MELT environments and bindings
@subsubsection MELT environments and bindings

A MELT module uses previously available bindings (imported values,
etc..) and provides its own bindings (exported values,
etc..). Bindings are objects (of superclass @code{CLASS_ANY_BINDING},
e.g. of some class like @code{CLASS_VALUE_BINDING}
@code{CLASS_MACRO_BINDING} @code{CLASS_PATMACRO_BINDING}
@code{CLASS_INSTANCE_BINDING} etc@dots{}). Bindings are grouped in
environments (themselves objects of class
@code{CLASS_ENVIRONMENT}). Each environment is linked to its
parent. So a MELT module is initialized in its parent module
environment and gives its own module environment.

Hence MELT environments are objects with a @code{env_bind} field (the
object map of bindings), a @code{env_prev} field (the previous
environment), etc@dots{} All bindings are objects with a @code{binder}
field (the bound ``name'', e.g. a symbol, used as the key in the
binding map of environments).

User MELT code is ordinarily not supposed to explicitly change
environments and bindings (but they are changed implicitly at module
initialization).

@node translating a MELT module
@subsubsection translating a MELT module

@cindex translation of MELT 
A MELT file @file{@var{foo}.melt} [which can be viewed as defining the
@var{foo} MELT module] is translated into a C source
@file{@var{foo}.c} which is then compiled into a dynamically loadable
shared library - usually @file{@var{foo}.so} on Linux. The translation
to C is done using @code{cc1} (or @code{gcc}, not implemented yet)
with the @code{-fmelt=translatefile -fmelt-arg=@var{foo}.melt
-fmelt-secondarg=@var{foo}.c} options. The generated file
@var{foo}.c is usually quite big (and only @code{#include}-ing one
file, @code{"run-melt.h"} which includes all the rest). It
essentially contains one static C function (of signature compatible
with @code{melt_apply}) for each @code{defun} or @code{lambda}
function in MELT, and one big exported @code{start_module_melt} C
function which does all the initializations, and some other stuff. The
initialization code builds all the required data (quoted symbols,
closures, classes, fields, boxed strings, static instances defined
thru @code{definstance} etc..); MELT modules have no data outside of
this @code{start_module_melt} function.

The start function @code{start_module_melt} (which is found by
dynamic loading of the module, usually thru @code{dlopen} and
@code{dlsym} or their equivalent, and called only once) expects a
parent environment and returns the newly filled module
environment@footnote{There is an ordered sequence of MELT modules, the
very first, @code{warmelt-first}, being translated specially and gets
a nil parent.}.

@node MELT module initialization and exports
@subsubsection MELT module initialization and exports

@cindex modules in MELT 
Names defined (as a function thru @code{defun}, as a class thru
@code{defclass}, as a field, etc@dots{}) are not visible outside their
module (to further MELT modules loaded afterwards) unless they are
@emph{exported}. Most names (e.g. functions, selectors, instances) are
exported as values using the @code{export_values} construct. Classes
are usually exported using @code{export_class}@footnote{If a class is
exported using @code{export_value} -almost always a mistake-, its
fields are not visible outside.}, which also exports all the own
fields of the exported class (but inherited fields are not exported,
unless their class was @code{export_class}-ed).

Advanced users can extend the MELT language by exporting macros using
the @code{export_macro} construct, which gets a macro name and its
macro expander function, which takes as arguments the source
expression (of @code{CLASS_SEXPR}), the environment (of
@code{CLASS_ENVIRONMENT}), the current expander, and produces an
instance of a subclass of @code{CLASS_SRC}.

@node MELT translation steps
@subsubsection MELT translation steps

The generated C code is of much lower level than the MELT source. The
MELT source code is usually in a file but can be elsewhere (a list or
s-exprs in memory).

The generated C code interacts with MELT runtime and garbage
collector; in particular, every value -even temporary ones- should be
explicitly stored in MELT frames known by the GC. Hence, MELT
expressions are quickly normalized : @code{(f (g x) y)} becomes
something similar to @i{@b{let} gg = g x @b{in} f gg y}@footnote{We
use ML like syntax to emphasize that this is only an internal MELT
representation, not an s-expr!} where @i{gg} is a fresh variable
(actually an instance of @code{CLASS_CLONEDSYMBOL}).

@cindex reader in MELT 
@cindex s-expression in MELT 
The @emph{reader}, or some other source, provides a list of
s-expressions to be translated. Each such s-expression is an instance
of @code{CLASS_SEXPR} so has @code{prop_table loca_location
sexp_contents} as fields. The @code{:loca_location} field is a mixloc
giving the staring position and file of the s-expr. The
@code{:sexp_contents} is a list value containing the s-expression
elements. Leafs are read specifically, e.g. boxed integers (of
@code{DISCR_INTEGER}) for integers, or symbols (instances of
@code{CLASS_SYMBOL}) or keywords (instances of @code{CLASS_KEYWORD},
etc. All these classes are defined in @file{warmelt-first.melt}.

@cindex macro-expansion in MELT 
Then s-expressions are @emph{macro-expanded} into objects of
subclasses of @code{CLASS_SRC}. Standard macros (in particular all the
constructs defined above, @pxref{MELT syntax constructs}.) are defined
in @file{warmelt-macro.melt}. For instance, the @code{if} macro is
expanded by the @code{mexpand_if} expander function (private to
@file{warmelt-macro.melt}) which makes an instance of
@code{CLASS_SRC_IFELSE} with fields @code{:src_loc sif_test :sif_then
:sif_else} and this @code{mexpand_if} expander is given to
@code{export_macro}. Macro expanders might need some of
@code{expand_apply lambda_arg_bindings macroexpand_1} @dots{}
functions defined in @file{warmelt-macro.melt}.

@cindex normalization in MELT 
@cindex nrep in MELT 
After macro-expansion, the expanded source code (instances of some
subclass of @code{CLASS_SRC}) is @emph{normalized} into instances of
subclasses of @code{CLASS_NREP} (for normal representations,
i.e. @emph{nrep}s) by code in @file{warmelt-normal.melt}. Normal
expressions are not nested, so we separate simple nreps from complex
normal expressions (@code{CLASS_NREP_SIMPLE} vs
@code{CLASS_NREP_EXPR}). Normalization means not only adding extra
internal lets (i.e. instances of @code{CLASS_NREP_LET} but sometimes
computing additional information, such as the ctype of many
expressions. Normalization is in particular done with the
@code{normal_exp} selector (returning the nrep primarily and
secundarily a list of additional bindings), and other utilities such
as @code{normalize_tuple get_ctype wrap_normal_letseq} etc@dots{} For
instance the normalization of @code{if} constructs is done in the
@code{normal_exp} method for @code{CLASS_SRC_IF}, in a private
function called @code{normexp_if} which returns an instance of
@code{CLASS_NREP_IF} with fields @code{:nrep_loc nif_test :nif_then
:nif_else :nif_ctyp} and a list of additional normal bindings (of
@code{CLASS_NORMLET_BINDING}). Macro-expansion and normalization
sometimes give simpler representations; e.g. all of @code{if and or}
constructs get normalized as instances of @code{CLASS_NREP_IF}.

@cindex code generation in MELT
@cindex objcode in MELT
After normalization, nreps (which are expression-like) are transformed
in the ``code generation''@footnote{this is not a proper term, since
the generated code is only a representation of low level C code.} step
into instruction-like representations called @emph{objcode}s .
instances of subclasses of @code{CLASS_OBJCODE}. This happens in
@file{warmelt-genobj.melt} using the @code{compile_obj} selector,
which, applied to nreps and a generation context (a merge of various
info), produce objcodes. Moving from nreps expressions to instructions
involve very often putting a destination on an nrep thru the
@code{put_objdest} selector.

@cindex code output in MELT
At last, the objcode is output, within the @file{warmelt-outobj.melt}
file, in two string-buffers (one for the header part, one for the body
part) using several selectors like @code{output_c_code
output_c_declinit output_c_initfill output_c_initpredef}. Only once
all objcodes has been output in string buffers is it actually spilled
to the generated C file, all at once.

Advanced users can extend the MELT language by implementing extensions
at various levels of the MELT translator.

Several important data or functions are available thru the
@code{initial_system_data} instance (the only instance of
@code{CLASS_SYSTEM_DATA}), including the exporting and importing
machinery, the fresh module environment maker, the symbols and
keywords dictionnaries and internizers.


All the MELT translation occur in @file{warmelt-*.melt} files which
generate their @file{warmelt-*.c} counterparts (these generated files
are distributed with GCC sources). Be careful to minimize the
interaction between these files and the rest of GCC (in particular,
avoid having a strong dependecies between GCC internal data
representations - like @code{gimple}) to be able to regenerate the
translating and translated files @file{warmelt-*.c} from
@file{warmelt-*.melt} even when GCC internal passes
evolve@footnote{using the @code{upgrade-warmelt} make target.}.




@node Writing GCC passes in MELT 
@subsection Writing GCC passes in MELT

[For experts, knowing about GCC passes in general]

GCC passes can be written in MELT. See the @file{ana-*.melt} files.

@node Writing C code for MELT
@section Writing C code for MELT

[For experts] Sometimes (i.e. to implement a new primitive) it may be
necessary to write some C code for MELT. We describe here the coding
conventions to follow, in particular because MELT has a copying
generational garbage collector (which changes pointers when copying
values out of the nursery).

Above all, @emph{avoid coding in C} (a cumbersome task) and
@emph{prefer writing MELT code} when possible.

Remember that MELT pointers can move at every allocation and every
MELT related call.

First, a real example. To box a long integer into a MELT value, MELT
code have to use the @code{make_integerbox} defined in
@file{warmelt-first.melt} as
@lisp
(defprimitive make_integerbox (discr :long n) :value
  "(meltgc_new_int((meltobject_ptr_t)(" discr "), (" n ")))")
@end lisp
If the passed @code{discr} is not a discriminant for boxed integers,
@code{make_integerbox} gives nil.

To get the boxed integer's content, use the @code{getint} primitive in
MELT. To test if a value is a boxed integer, use the
@code{is_integerbox} primitive.

The @code{meltgc_new_int} routine is implemented in
@file{melt.c} with the following code. We give it entirely, with
additional comments

@verbatim
melt_ptr_t
meltgc_new_int (meltobject_ptr_t discr_p, long num)
{
  MELT_ENTERFRAME (2, NULL);
#define newintv curfram__.varptr[0]
#define discrv  curfram__.varptr[1]
#define object_discrv ((meltobject_ptr_t)(discrv))
#define int_newintv ((struct meltint_st*)(newintv))
@end verbatim
We first create a MELT frame using the @code{MELT_ENTERFRAME} macro
which creates, initialize the frame and install it at top. The first
argument is the number of local MELT values, the second argument is
the current MELT closure (so is @code{NULL} for C code which is not
the code of a routine). Instead of writing @code{curfram__.varptr[0]}
we @code{#define} some more descriptive names for readability. The
frame is initially filled with nil values. The value pointer arguments
(here @code{discr_p}) of the C function are conventionally named with
a @code{_p} suffix. Every local MELT value should be inside your
@code{curfram__.varptr} array.


@verbatim
  discrv = (void *) discr_p;
@end verbatim
Every value passed as a C argument should be immediately copied into
the MELT frame (i.e. as a local value) and the C argument should not
be used directly afterwards. So never use @code{_p} suffixed arguments
after have copied them inside the frame.

@verbatim
  if (melt_magic_discr ((melt_ptr_t) (discrv)) != OBMAG_OBJECT)
    goto end;
  if (object_discrv->object_magic != OBMAG_INT)
    goto end;
@end verbatim
We try to be safe, so we at least test that the discriminant is an
object. We could have tested that it is indeed an instance of
@code{CLASS_DISCR} but that would be slower but safer. However we do
test that the discriminant's magic is indeed
@code{OBMAG_INT}@footnote{It is essential to ensure that every MELT
value has the good magic numer in its discriminant. Violating that
would crash GCC.}. If either test fail, we return nil by @code{goto
end}. We cannot code a direct @code{return} statement, because that
would not pop the topmost MELT frame.

@verbatim
  newintv = meltgc_allocate (sizeof (struct meltint_st), 0);
  int_newintv->discr = object_discrv;
  int_newintv->val = num;
@end verbatim
We allocate space in the nursery with @code{meltgc_allocate}. This
C function sometimes trigger MELT garbage collection, so may move any
pointer inside any MELT frames. The first argument to
@code{meltgc_allocate} is the @code{sizeof} of the fixed part of
the value, and the second is the size of its trailing variable
part. The allocated zone should be immediately filled to make a valid
MELT value.

@verbatim
end:
  MELT_EXITFRAME ();
  return (melt_ptr_t) newintv;
#undef newintv
#undef discrv
#undef int_newintv
#undef object_discrv
}
@end verbatim
We end by popping the current MELT frame and retuning. Popping the
frame should always be done, so conventionally we use an @code{end:}
label. To be good citizens for further C functions, we
@code{#undef}-ing every C macro defined for readability.

More generally, every C function which may (directly or in any deeply
called function) trigger the MELT garbage collector should follow
these rules:

@enumerate

@item avoid coding in C. 
The whole purpose of MELT is to make coding more fun.

@item make an explicit MELT frame and enter it.
The C routine should start by making a frame usually with
@code{MELT_ENTERFRAME} macro (which expands to a C declaration
followed by some C statements, so should be the last ``declaration''
like stuff in your function). For readability, you want to define C
macros (conventionally ending with @code{v}) to access the local
values in your frame instead of @code{curfram__.varptr[@var{index}]}.

@item put every value in the MELT frame.
This means that every value should be kept in a local inside the MELT
frame, accessed thru @code{curfram__}. In particular, @emph{nesting
function calls is prohibited}; never code @code{f(g(x))} if @code{g}
may trigger a MELT garbage collection; use a local value for
@code{g(x)} instead, and avoid declaring any MELT value as a C local.

@item try to code safely.
Unless you have specific reasons to avoid that, try to test MELT
values before using them.

@item notify on MELT updates.
When a MELT value is updated by changing some MELT pointer inside it,
you have to notify the garbage collector (write barrier) using the
@code{meltgc_touch} function (taking as argument the modified MELT
value) or the @code{meltgc_touch_dest} (also given the new MELT
pointer inside). These functions has to be called just after writing
the MELT pointer into the data. They can call the MELT garbage
collector (which may change any local value in the MELT frame).

@item allocate MELT data appropriately.
Use @code{meltgc_allocate}, or preferably some existing allocating
function (like @code{meltgc_new_*}) to allocate new MELT
values. Never forget that such an allocation may trigger the MELT GC
and change every local pointer in the current MELT frame
@code{curfram__}. Most C functions which may directly or indirectly
trigger a MELT garbage collection are prefixed with @code{meltgc}
(but @code{melt_apply} could also trigger that).

@item don't use longjmp,
because @code{longjmp} won't pop the MELT frames.

@item always exit the MELT frame
explicitly using @code{MELT_EXITFRAME()} macro, which usually is
the last statement of your function (so avoid @code{return}-ing
before, hence always use a @code{goto end} instead.

@item avoid using global MELT values.
If you really need some, use the @code{MELTGOB} or @code{MELTG}
macros. Adding additional MELT globals is tricky (edit files
@file{melt.h} and @file{warmelt-normal.melt}). Using existing MELT
globals is simpler, e.g. @code{MELTGOB(DISCR_LIST)} to fetch the
predefined discriminant @code{DISCR_LIST}.

@item apply MELT functions and send MELT messages
using @code{melt_apply} and @code{meltgc_send} with their
pecular calling conventions (constant string describing array of
unions).
@end enumerate

@c =======================================================================
