\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename libitm.info
@settitle GNU libitm
@c %**end of header


@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``Funding Free Software'', the Front-Cover
texts being (a) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being (b)
(see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end copying

@ifinfo
@dircategory GNU Libraries
@direntry
* libitm: (libitm).                    GNU Transactional Memory Library
@end direntry

This manual documents the GNU Transactional Memory Library.

Published by the Free Software Foundation
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor
Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA

@insertcopying
@end ifinfo


@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title The GNU Transactional Memory Library
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@comment For the @value{version-GCC} Version*
@sp 1
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor@*
Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA@*
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@summarycontents
@contents
@page


@node Top
@top Introduction
@cindex Introduction

This manual documents the usage and internals of libitm, the GNU Transactional
Memory Library. It provides transaction support for accesses to a process'
memory, enabling easy-to-use synchronization of accesses to shared memory by
several threads.


@comment
@comment  When you add a new menu item, please keep the right hand
@comment  aligned to the same column.  Do not use tabs.  This provides
@comment  better formatting.
@comment
@menu
* Enabling libitm::            How to enable libitm for your applications.
* C/C++ Language Constructs for TM::
                               Notes on the language-level interface supported
                               by gcc.
* The libitm ABI::             Notes on the external ABI provided by libitm.
* Internals::                  Notes on libitm's internal synchronization.
* Copying::                    GNU general public license says
                               how you can copy and share libgomp.
* GNU Free Documentation License::
                               How you can copy and share this manual.
* Funding::                    How to help assure continued work for free 
                               software.
* Index::                      Index of this documentation.
@end menu


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Enabling libitm
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Enabling libitm
@chapter Enabling libitm

To activate support for TM in C/C++, the compile-time flag @option{-fgnu-tm}
must be specified. This enables TM language-level constructs such as
transaction statements (@code{__transaction}, @pxref{C/C++ Language
Constructs for TM} for details).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c C/C++ Language Constructs for TM
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node C/C++ Language Constructs for TM
@chapter C/C++ Language Constructs for TM

TODO: link to the C++ TM spec. a few examples. how gcc's support differs. 

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c The libitm ABI
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node The libitm ABI
@chapter The libitm ABI

The ABI provided by libitm is basically equal to the Linux variant of Intel's
current TM ABI specification document (Revision 1.1, May 6 2009) but with the
differences listed in this chapter. It would be good if these changes would
eventually be merged into a future version of this specification. To ease
look-up, the following subsections mirror the structure of this specification.

@section [No changes] Objectives
@section [No changes] Non-objectives

@section Library design principles
@subsection [No changes] Calling conventions
@subsection [No changes] TM library algorithms
@subsection [No changes] Optimized load and store routines
@subsection [No changes] Aligned load and store routines

@subsection Data logging functions

The memory locations accessed with transactional loads and stores and the
memory locations whose values are logged must not overlap. This required
separation only extends to the scope of the execution of one transaction
including all the executions of all nested transactions.

The compiler must be consistent (within the scope of a single transaction)
about which memory locations are shared and which are not shared with other
threads (i.e., data must be accessed either transactionally or
nontransactionally). Otherwise, non-write-through TM algorithms would not work.

@subsection [No changes] Scatter/gather calls
@subsection [No changes] Serial and irrevocable mode
@subsection [No changes] Transaction descriptor
@subsection Store allocation

There is no @code{getTransaction} function. 

@subsection [No changes] Naming conventions

@subsection Function pointer encryption

Currently, this is not implemented.


@section Types and macros list

@code{_ITM_codeProperties} has changed, @pxref{txn-code-properties,,Starting a
transaction}.
@code{_ITM_srcLocation} is not used. 


@section Function list

@subsection Initialization and finalization functions
These functions are not part of the ABI.

@subsection [No changes] Version checking
@subsection [No changes] Error reporting
@subsection [No changes] inTransaction call

@subsection State manipulation functions
There is no @code{getTransaction} function. Transaction identifiers for
nested transactions will be ordered but not necessarily sequential (i.e., for
a nested transaction's identifier @var{IN} and its enclosing transaction's
identifier @var{IE}, it is guaranteed that @math{IN >= IE}).

@subsection [No changes] Source locations

@subsection Starting a transaction

@subsubsection Transaction code properties

@anchor{txn-code-properties}
The bit @code{hasNoXMMUpdate} is instead called @code{hasNoVectorUpdate}.
Iff it is set, vector register save/restore is not necessary for any target
machine.

The @code{hasNoFloatUpdate} bit (@code{0x0010}) is new. Iff it is set, floating
point register save/restore is not necessary for any target machine.

@code{undoLogCode} is not supported and a fatal runtime error will be raised
if this bit is set. It is not properly defined in the ABI why barriers
other than undo logging are not present; Are they not necessary (e.g., a
transaction operating purely on thread-local data) or have they been omitted by
the compiler because it thinks that some kind of global synchronization
(e.g., serial mode) might perform better? The specification suggests that the
latter might be the case, but the former seems to be more useful.

The @code{readOnly} bit (@code{0x4000}) is new. @strong{TODO} Lexical or dynamic
scope?

@code{hasNoRetry} is not supported. If this bit is not set, but
@code{hasNoAbort} is set, the library can assume that transaction
rollback will not be requested.

It would be useful if the absence of externally-triggered rollbacks would be
reported for the dynamic scope as well, not just for the lexical scope
(@code{hasNoAbort}). Without this, a library cannot exploit this together
with flat nesting.

@code{exceptionBlock} is not supported because exception blocks are not used.

@subsubsection [No changes] Windows exception state
@subsubsection [No changes] Other machine state

@subsubsection [No changes] Results from beginTransaction

@subsection Aborting a transaction

@code{_ITM_rollbackTransaction} is not supported. @code{_ITM_abortTransaction}
is supported but the abort reason @code{exceptionBlockAbort} is not (and there
are no exception blocks in general, so the related cases also do not have to
be considered).

@subsection Committing a transaction

The exception handling (EH) scheme is different. The Intel ABI requires the
@code{_ITM_tryCommitTransaction} function that will return even when the
commit failed and will have to be matched with calls to either
@code{_ITM_abortTransaction} or @code{_ITM_commitTransaction}. In contrast,
gcc relies on transactional wrappers for the functions of the Exception
Handling ABI and on one additional commit function (shown below). This allows
the TM to keep track of EH internally and thus it does not have to embed the
cleanup of EH state into the existing EH code in the program.
@code{_ITM_tryCommitTransaction} is not supported.
@code{_ITM_commitTransactionToId} is also not supported because the
propagation of thrown exceptions will not bypass commits of nested
transactions.

@example
void _ITM_commitTransactionEH(void *exc_ptr) ITM_REGPARM;
void *_ITM_cxa_allocate_exception (size_t);
void _ITM_cxa_throw (void *obj, void *tinfo, void *dest);
void *_ITM_cxa_begin_catch (void *exc_ptr);
void _ITM_cxa_end_catch (void);
@end example

@code{_ITM_commitTransactionEH} must be called to commit a transaction if an
exception could be in flight at this position in the code. @code{exc_ptr} is
the current exception or zero if there is no current exception.
The @code{_ITM_cxa...} functions are transactional wrappers for the respective
@code{__cxa...} functions and must be called instead of these in transactional
code.

To support this EH scheme, libstdc++ needs to provide one additional function
(@code{_cxa_tm_cleanup}), which is used by the TM to clean up the exception
handling state while rolling back a transaction:

@example
void __cxa_tm_cleanup (void *unthrown_obj, void *cleanup_exc,
                       unsigned int caught_count);
@end example

@code{unthrown_obj} is non-null if the program called
@code{__cxa_allocate_exception} for this exception but did not yet called
@code{__cxa_throw} for it. @code{cleanup_exc} is non-null if the program is
currently processing a cleanup along an exception path but has not caught this
exception yet. @code{caught_count} is the nesting depth of
@code{__cxa_begin_catch} within the transaction (which can be counted by the TM
using @code{_ITM_cxa_begin_catch} and @code{_ITM_cxa_end_catch});
@code{__cxa_tm_cleanup} then performs rollback by essentially performing
@code{__cxa_end_catch} that many times.



@subsection Exception handling support

Currently, there is no support for functionality like
@code{__transaction_cancel throw} as described in the C++ TM specification.
Supporting this should be possible with the EH scheme explained previously
because via the transactional wrappers for the EH ABI, the TM is able to
observe and intercept EH.


@subsection [No changes] Transition to serial--irrevocable mode
@subsection [No changes] Data transfer functions
@subsection [No changes] Transactional memory copies

@subsection Transactional versions of memmove

If either the source or destination memory region is to be accessed
nontransactionally, then source and destination regions must not be
overlapping. The respective @code{_ITM_memmove} functions are still
available but a fatal runtime error will be raised if such regions do overlap.
To support this functionality, the ABI would have to specify how the
intersection of the regions has to be accessed (i.e., transactionally or
nontransactionally).

@subsection [No changes] Transactional versions of memset
@subsection [No changes] Logging functions

@subsection User-registered commit and undo actions

Commit actions will get executed in the same order in which the respective
calls to @code{_ITM_addUserCommitAction} happened. Only
@code{_ITM_noTransactionId} is allowed as value for the
@code{resumingTransactionId} argument. Commit actions get executed after
privatization safety has been ensured.

Undo actions will get executed in reverse order compared to the order in which
the respective calls to @code{_ITM_addUserUndoAction} happened. The ordering of
undo actions w.r.t. the roll-back of other actions (e.g., data transfers or
memory allocations) is undefined.

@code{_ITM_dropReferences} is not supported currently because its semantics and
the intention behind it is not entirely clear. The
specification suggests that this function is necessary because of certain
orderings of data transfer undos and the releasing of memory regions (i.e.,
privatization). However, this ordering is never defined, nor is the ordering of
dropping references w.r.t. other events.

@subsection [New] Transactional indirect calls

Indirect calls (i.e., calls through a function pointer) within transactions
should execute the transactional clone of the original function (i.e., a clone
of the original that has been fully instrumented to use the TM runtime), if
such a clone is available. The runtime provides two functions to
register/deregister clone tables:

@example
struct clone_entry
@{
  void *orig, *clone;
@};

void _ITM_registerTMCloneTable (clone_entry *table, size_t entries);
void _ITM_deregisterTMCloneTable (clone_entry *table);
@end example

Registered tables must be writable by the TM runtime, and must be live
throughout the life-time of the TM runtime.

@strong{TODO} The intention was always to drop the registration functions
entirely, and create a new ELF Phdr describing the linker-sorted table.  Much
like what currently happens for @code{PT_GNU_EH_FRAME}.
This work kept getting bogged down in how to represent the @var{N} different
code generation variants.  We clearly needed at least two---SW and HW
transactional clones---but there was always a suggestion of more variants for
different TM assumptions/invariants.

The compiler can then use two TM runtime functions to perform indirect calls in
transactions:
@example
void *_ITM_getTMCloneOrIrrevocable (void *function) ITM_REGPARM;
void *_ITM_getTMCloneSafe (void *function) ITM_REGPARM;
@end example

If there is a registered clone for supplied function, both will return a
pointer to the clone. If not, the first runtime function will attempt to switch
to serial--irrevocable mode and return the original pointer, whereas the second
will raise a fatal runtime error.

@subsection [New] Transactional dynamic memory management

@example
void *_ITM_malloc (size_t)
       __attribute__((__malloc__)) ITM_PURE;
void *_ITM_calloc (size_t, size_t)
       __attribute__((__malloc__)) ITM_PURE;
void _ITM_free (void *) ITM_PURE;
@end example

These functions are essentially transactional wrappers for @code{malloc},
@code{calloc}, and @code{free}. Within transactions, the compiler should
replace calls to the original functions with calls to the wrapper functions.


@section [No changes] Future Enhancements to the ABI

@section Sample code 

The code examples might not be correct w.r.t. the current version of the ABI,
especially everything related to exception handling.


@section [New] Memory model

The ABI should define a memory model and the ordering that is guaranteed for
data transfers and commit/undo actions, or at least refer to another memory
model that needs to be preserved. Without that, the compiler cannot ensure the
memory model specified on the level of the programming language (e.g., by the
C++ TM specification).

For example, if a transactional load is ordered before another load/store, then
the TM runtime must also ensure this ordering when accessing shared state. If
not, this might break the kind of publication safety used in the C++ TM
specification. Likewise, the TM runtime must ensure privatization safety.



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Internals
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Internals
@chapter Internals

@section Nesting: flat vs. closed

We support two different kinds of nesting of transactions. In the case of
@emph{flat nesting}, the nesting structure is flattened and all nested
transactions are subsumed by the enclosing transaction. In contrast,
with @emph{closed nesting}, nested transactions that have not yet committed
can be rolled back separately from the enclosing transactions; when they
commit, they are subsumed by the enclosing transaction, and their effects
will be finally committed when the outermost transaction commits.
@emph{Open nesting} (where nested transactions can commit independently of the
enclosing transactions) are not supported.

Flat nesting is the default nesting mode, but closed nesting is supported and
used when transactions contain user-controlled aborts
(@code{__transaction_cancel} statements). We assume that user-controlled
aborts are rare in typical code and used mostly in exceptional situations.
Thus, it makes more sense to use flat nesting by default to avoid the
performance overhead of the additional checkpoints required for closed
nesting. User-controlled aborts will correctly abort the innermost enclosing
transaction, whereas the whole (i.e., outermost) transaction will be restarted
otherwise (e.g., when a transaction encounters data conflicts during
optimistic execution).


@strong{TODO}: SI-mode implementation, method sets, ...

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GNU General Public License
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include gpl.texi



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GNU Free Documentation License
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Funding Free Software
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include funding.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Index
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
